little tweaks needed:
need to sanity test
- make sure each layer contains at least 1 mandatory component (ie, usually at least a core + mantle, gas giants must have an atmosphere too)
- make sure if liquid boils/freezes out of one layer it ends up in another


done:

supercritical fluid seems too common on terrestrial planets - maybe make pressure scale differently (ratio^2)
moons need to be sorted
planets dont seem to lose volatiles readily enough .. possibly due to the pressure effect described earlier?

---
problem: 
deciding what matter state/part of the geosphere a chemical exists in is not simple.
take the example of a gas giant - theres metallic hydrogen in the core, super critical hydrogen in the mantle, and gaseous hydrogen in the atmosphere
THIS CAN EVEN INCLUDE METALS!!!

for each layer of the geosphere
  compute the temperature, pressure, and gravity at this layer
  compute the matter state for each chemical based on the above
  if its matter state isnt correct for this layer, remove it (sink or float up)
  if it's a gas and this is the atmosphere AND the molecular weight doesnt "beat" the planets gravity, remove it

clouds - not sure, but can use a heuristic - if liquid X exists on a planet's hydrosphere and gas X exists in its atmoshere, change it from atmosphere to clouds




maybe need to add more geospheres:
surface - day side
surface - night side
surface - winter hemisphere / polar regions (winter temp)
surface - summer hemisphere

need these temperatures:
surface - summer day
surface - summer night
surface - winter day
surface - winter night
atmosphere - day side
atmosphere - night side 

habitable areas
atmosphere - day side
atmosphere - night side
subsurface oceans (etc)


poles (north and south?)
and include temperature in geosphere instead of planet


step 1 - start with a list of all chemicals
step 2 - find out what state of matter each chemical would be in day, night, winter
step 3 - if at any point the matter would be gaseous and the planet has no atmosphere, remove that chemical
step 4 - instead of using a "force non gas" option, use escape velocity to remove any chemical that would turn into a REALLY energetic gas on a low gravity planet
--the above steps should cut down the number of planets that undergo major phase transitions of matter to a reasonable level
step 5 - if there are too many chems on a planets layer, remove some randomly by weight (also gas/metal/volatile AMOUNT can factor in)
step 6 - define/track the matter transitions on the planet between day/night/winter and create traits to describe them
step 7 - the planet menu should show 'geosphere' as representing day, with a button to toggle between day/night/winter (if any difference)

step x - categorize the planet based on its chemical states and matter transitions (ie, steam vs ice giant)

current problems:
"replacing"/overlaying the chemical at a layer is tacky
its not clear enough what happens to chemcs during state transition
reinstate mantle, core
have 1 matter state associated to each layer
====

ideas - have a few substances at the start
for each time (day v night v winter) check what matter phase each substance would be
use this to determine what all the phase transitions are
list ALL the substances under the planets geosphere but add "traits" that describe how the substances move around, ie, when they dont exist

changes required:
all layers now have multiple chemicals (most % by mass = listed first)
way to track which element has the most mass overall
better cloud handling. clouds must go from liquid on land to liquid/solid in the troposphere. where/when this cant happen, dont have clouds, or make them fall as very light rain/hail.
maybe merge geosphere testing into a single run through (instead of multiple iterations on same function)
maybe merge geospheres so there is only one, and have phase transition traits describe the info that "day geosphere, night geosphere, winter geosphere" are currently conveying

validation required:
planet cant have zero atmosphere due to phase transitions
terrestrial planet must retain 1 of lithosphere/hydrosphere at all times

-----------
geosphere phase transitions:

1a. ocean freezing/sinking (hydrosphere->none, replaced by other hydrosphere)
hydrosphere = super cooled liquid, freezes into ice and sinks during winter/night
--causes secondary effect - clouds using that liquid can't from

1b. ocean freezing/floating (hydrosphere->cryosphere)
in this case it would replace the existing cryosphere or form a new one that didnt exist before. 
requires: water and a few other substances have an ice form thats lighter than the liquid form

1c. ocean boiling (hydrosphere->atmosphere)

1d. molten surface cools into rock (molten hydrosphere->lithosphere)


2a. atmosphere rains down (atmosphere->hydrosphere)
hydrosphere = liquid, gets boiled during daytime/summer and joins the atmosphere
--causes secondary effect, clouds can't form (probably SHOULD)

2b. atmosphere falls down as hail (atmosphere->cryosphere)


3. planets surface turns to magma (lithosphere->molten hydrosphere, definitely replaces whatever was there before)

4a. planetary ice sublimates (cryosphere->atmosphere)
4b. planetary ice melts (cryosphere->liquisphere)



note: many of the above can happen simulaneously


---
sulfuric acid shows up as 
-compressed solid in hydrosphere
-liquid in atmosphere